Version 5.0.0 release blog (#485)
dojo/dojo.io: site/source/_posts/2019/01/28/Version-5-Dojo.md

```

In your tests you can then write a base assertion which would be the default render state of your widget.

Given the following widget:

```ts
class NumberWidget extends WidgetBase<{ num?: number }> {
	protected render() {
		const { num } = this.properties;
		const message = num === undefined ? 'no number passed' : `the number ${num}`;
		return v('div', [
			v('span', [ message ])
		]);
	}
}
```

The base assertion might look like:

```ts
const baseAssertion = assertionTemplate(() => {
	return v('div', [
		v('span', { '~key': 'message' }, [ 'no number passed' ]);
	]);
});
```

and in a test would look like:

```ts
it('should render no number passed when no number is passed as a property', () => {
	const h = harness(() => w(NumberWidget, {}));
	h.expect(baseAssertion);
});
```

Now let's see how we would test the output when the `num` property is passed to the `NumberWidget`:

```ts
it('should render the number when a number is passed as a property', () => {
	const numberAssertion = baseAssertion.setChildren('~message', [ 'the number 5' ]);
	const h = harness(() => w(NumberWidget, { num: 5 }));
	h.expect(numberAssertion);
});
```

> Here we're using the `setChildren()` API on the `baseAssertion`, and we're using a special `~` selector to find a node with a key of `~message`. The `~key` property is a special property on Assertion Templates and will be erased at assertion time so it doesn't show up when matching the renders. This allows you to decorate the Assertion Templates to easily select nodes, without having to augment the actual widgets render function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we're using the `setChildren()` API on the `baseAssertion`, and we're using a special `~` selector to find a node with a key of `~message`. The `~key` property is a special property on Assertion Templates and will get erased at assertion time, so it doesn't show up when matching the renders. This approach allows you to decorate the Assertion Templates to easily select nodes, without having to augment the actual widgets render function.
```

> Once we have the `message` node we then set the children to the expected `the number 5`, and use the resulting template in `h.expect`. It's important to note Assertion Templates always return a new Assertion Template when setting a value, this ensures you don't accidentally mutate an existing template (causing other tests to potentially fail), and allows you to compose layered Templates incrementally building on each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we have the `message` node we then set the children to the expected `the number 5`, and use the resulting template in `h.expect`. It's important to note Assertion Templates always return a new Assertion Template when setting a value, this ensures you don't accidentally mutate an existing template (potentially causing other tests to fail), and allows you to compose layered Templates incrementally building on each other.
```

### Improved Stores Middleware

> Middleware for Dojo stores has always been executed after a process has completed or throws an error, enabling users to make decisions based on the result and perform some additional actions. However, this was limiting middleware from running before or effectively wrapping a process. Version 5 of Dojo introduces `before` and `after` middleware to perform such actions around processes completely. [Read more on the `@dojo/framework/stores` readme][StoresReadme].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Middleware for Dojo stores has always gotten executed after a process has completed or throws an error, enabling users to make decisions based on the result and perform some additional actions. However, this was limiting middleware from running before or effectively wrapping a process. Version 5 of Dojo introduces `before` and `after` middleware to perform such actions around processes completely. [Read more on the `@dojo/framework/stores` readme][StoresReadme].
```

> This is a breaking change. However, if your application was already using `createCallbackDecorator` to create your middleware, then they should continue to work with your application in version 5 of Dojo application as the `createCallbackDecorator` function has been adapted to transform existing middleware API to the new API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This addition of `before` and `after` middleware is a breaking change. However, if your application was already using `createCallbackDecorator` to create your middleware, then your application should continue to work with your application in version 5 of Dojo application as the `createCallbackDecorator` function has been adapted to transform existing middleware API to the new API.
```

### Extended TypeScript Support

Dojo now supports TypeScript versions from 2.6.x to 3.2.x, please see our [TypeScript and Dojo compatibility matrix][TypeScriptSupport] for more information.

### Update to Dojo 5.0.0

> Visit the [Dojo version 5 migration guide][MigrationGuide] for detailed information and guidance on updating your application. Updating from 4.0.x to 5.0.0 should require running one command for most users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visit the [Dojo version 5 migration guide][MigrationGuide] for detailed information and guidance on updating your application. Updgrading from 4.0.x to 5.0.0 should require running one command for most users.
```

After installing the latest version of the `@dojo/cli-upgrade-app`, run the following command:

```sh
dojo upgrade app
```

### Beyond version 5

> We are working on a detailed road map for the next major release, however in the meantime check out our [future road map][RoadMap] for ideas we want to investigate over the next 12 months.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are working on a detailed roadmap for the next major release, however, in the meantime check out our [future roadmap][RoadMap] for ideas we want to investigate over the next 12 months.
```

### Support

See the [release notes][ReleaseNotes] for more details on version 5 of Dojo.

> Love what we’re doing or having a problem? We ❤️ our community. Reach out to us on [Discord][Discord], check out our [roadmap](https://dojo.io/community/) and see where Dojo is headed, and try out the new [Dojo on CodeSandbox][Codesanbox]. We look forward to your feedback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Love what we’re doing or having a problem? We ❤️ our community. Reach out to us on [Discord][Discord], check out our [roadmap](https://dojo.io/community/) and see where we are heading with Dojo,, and try out the new [Dojo on CodeSandbox][Codesanbox]. We look forward to your feedback.
```

---
title: Dojo 5
date: 2019-01-28 08:00:00
authorId: unknown
featured_image: featured.jpg
---

Dojo version 5 has arrived!

We're excited to announce the 5.0.0 release of Dojo. This version builds on previous releases with a vast array of bug fixes and improvements throughout the framework.

{% asset_img featured.jpg feature-full %}

### Conditional Polyfills - Serving Less JavaScript

One of our primary goals for modern Dojo is to improve performance by serving minimal JavaScript bundles by default. For version 5, we're happy to announce an out of the box solution to optimize the user experience for dealing with bundling and loading polyfills in Dojo applications.

> By using `@dojo/framework/shim` ponyfills for [`WebAnimations`][WebAnimationsAPI], [`IntersectionObserver`][IntersectionObserverAPI], [`ResizeObserver`][ResizeObserverAPI], and [`fetch`][FetchAPI] the Dojo build produces separate "platform" bundles that will be **only** be loaded based on two key conditions:

Reviewer 2: I'd like to remove these explicitly listed polyfills from the "serving less javascript" section. as it's a build pattern and not just relevant to these ponyfills. 

We should write a new section saying we've now added additional third party polyfills to shim, and they can/should be imported like any other ponyfill in shim. And mention the user no longer has to explicitly import the third party script or polyfill.

Reviewer 2: We should also briefly describe each of the polyfills with the appropriate link to WICG or whatever

1) The shim module is imported somewhere in an application.
1) A users browser does not natively support the browser feature.

In short, if your application does not use the browser feature or you use a browser with native support, the polyfill will not be loaded! This change means serving less JavaScript and improving your application performance without compromising on features.

### Better Build Time Rendering (BTR)

Build time rendering provides the rendering of your application to HTML during the build and in-lines critical CSS. BTR allows an application to render static HTML pages and offer some advantages of server-side rendering (SSR) such as performance and search engine optimization without the complexities of running a server to support full SSR. Build time rendering has been available via the Dojo [cli-build-app][CliBuildAppReadme]  command since our initial 2.0.0 release.

> The 5.0.0 release brings a more robust, flexible and feature-rich build time render by running your application at build time in a browser environment.

Reviewer 2: This is too wishy washy.

Author: any suggestions on what you'd like it to be?

Reviewer 2: Not really. Other than us concretely answering what this says (without really mentioning implementation detail?).

Author: Okay it's probably still "wishy washy", so let me know if you have any extra change suggestions 😄

Routing support has also been extended to support a `HistoryManager` using the browser [history API][HistoryAPI] via the `@dojo/framework/routing/history/StateHistory`. For `StateHistory` BTR produces a static HTML file for each of the paths defined in the build time rendering configuration.

To configure build time rendering to create static pages for the BTR paths, ensure you are using the `StateHistory` in your application and update your BTR config to specify paths without a `#` prefix.

```json
"build-app": {
	"build-time-render": {
		"root": "app",
		"paths": [
			"home",
			"about",
		]
	}
}
```

### Introducing Dojo Blocks

> Leveraging the improved BTR, Dojo Blocks open the door for creating rich static websites by enabling code to be executed in Node.js at build time and cached in the appropriate bundle for runtime.

Reviewer 2: Dojo Blocks is a new mechanism leveraging Build Time Rendering that allows executing code in node.js as part of the build. The results from the execution are written to a cache that can then be transparently used in the same way at runtime in the browser. This opens up new opportunities for performing operations that might be not possible or unperformant in a browser.

	return fs.readFileSync(path, 'utf8');
}
```

Using the `text.block.ts` module in your application with the [`Block` meta](https://github.com/dojo/framework/blob/master/src/widget-core/meta/Block.ts):

```ts
// src/MyBlockWidget.ts
import Block from '@dojo/framework/widget-core/meta/Block';
import WidgetBase from '@dojo/framework/widget-core/WidgetBase';
import { v } from '@dojo/framework/widget-core/d';

import readFile from './read-file.block';

export default class MyBlockWidget extends WidgetBase {
	protected render() {
		const message = this.meta(Block).run(readFile)('../content/hello-dojo-blocks.txt');
		return v('div', [ message ]);
	}
}
```

This widget runs the `read-file.block.ts` module at build time, loading the file path passed which gets used as the children in the widget. The rendered application's HTML and CSS get written to the built `index.html`:

```html
<html>
<head>
	<title>Dojo Blocks</title>
	<meta name="theme-color" content="#222127">
	<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
</head>
<body>
	<div id="root"><div>Hello Dojo Block World!</div></div>
	<script type="text/javascript" src="bootstrap.js"></script></body>
</html>
```

> ### Simplifying Testing with Assertion Templates

Reviewer 2: Probably still need a nice summary for this. Something along the lines of:
> Assertion Templates make testing widgets with the testing harness even easier. Instead of having to manually curate each expectedRender result per test, you can now use the Assertion Template primitive to easily modify and layer outputs for the expected render

---
title: Dojo 5
date: 2019-01-28 08:00:00
authorId: agubler
featured_image: featured.jpg
---

Dojo version 5 has arrived!

We're excited to announce the 5.0.0 release of Dojo. This version builds on previous releases with a vast array of bug fixes and improvements throughout the framework.

{% asset_img featured.jpg feature-full %}

### Conditional Polyfills - Serving Less JavaScript

One of our primary goals for modern Dojo is to improve performance by serving minimal JavaScript bundles by default. For version 5, we're happy to announce an out of the box solution to optimize the user experience for dealing with bundling and loading polyfills in Dojo applications.

> The Dojo build produces separate "platform" bundles that will be **only** be loaded based on two key conditions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Dojo build produces separate platform bundles that will be **only** be loaded based on two key conditions:
```

I don't see a need for quotes here.

### New Polyfills Added to Shim

We've added additional third party polyfills to `@dojo/framework/shim`:

* [`@dojo/framework/shim/fetch`][FetchAPI] - The Fetch API provides an interface for fetching resources (including across the network).
* [`@dojo/framework/shim/IntersectionObserver`][IntersectionObserverAPI] - The Intersection Observer API provides a way to asynchronously observe changes in the intersection of a target element with an ancestor element or with a top-level document's viewport.
* [`@dojo/framework/shim/WebAnimations`][WebAnimationsAPI] - The Web Animations API allows for synchronizing and timing changes to the presentation of a Web page, i.e. animation of DOM elements.
* [`@dojo/framework/shim/ResizeObserver`][ResizeObserverAPI] - The ResizeObserver interface reports changes to the content rectangle of an Element or the bounding box of an SVGElement. The content rectangle is the box in which content can be placed, meaning the border box minus the padding.

> To use these additional polyfills they should be imported like any other ponyfill provided by `@dojo/framework/shim` and they no longer need to be explicitly added/import to your Dojo application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use these additional polyfills they should be imported like any other ponyfill provided by `@dojo/framework/shim` and they no longer need to be explicitly added/imported to your Dojo application.
```

Also it might be confusing that we use polyfill and ponyfill here?

### Better Build Time Rendering (BTR)

Build time rendering provides the rendering of your application to HTML during the build and in-lines critical CSS. BTR allows an application to render static HTML pages and offer some advantages of server-side rendering (SSR) such as performance and search engine optimization without the complexities of running a server to support full SSR. Build time rendering has been available via the Dojo [cli-build-app][CliBuildAppReadme]  command since our initial 2.0.0 release.

> There have been a number of stability and feature enhancements in 5.0.0 thanks to now running your application in a real browser environment. New features include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a number of stability and feature enhancements in the 5.0.0 release thanks to the BTR process now running your application in a real browser environment. New features include:
```

 * [Dojo Blocks](#introducing-dojo-blocks)

>  * Support for StateHistory api (see below)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Support for `StateHistory` API (see below)
```

 * Multiple page HTML generation
 * Screenshots of pages visited during Build Time Rendering
 * Better error messaging

Routing support has been extended to support a `HistoryManager` using the browser [history API][HistoryAPI] via the `@dojo/framework/routing/history/StateHistory`. For `StateHistory` BTR produces a static HTML file for each of the paths defined in the build time rendering configuration.

To configure build time rendering to create static pages for the BTR paths, ensure you are using the `StateHistory` in your application and update your BTR config to specify paths without a `#` prefix.

```json
"build-app": {
	"build-time-render": {
		"root": "app",
		"paths": [
			"home",
			"about",
		]
	}
}
```

### Introducing Dojo Blocks

> Dojo Blocks is a new mechanism leveraging Build Time Rendering that allows executing code in node.js as part of the build. The results from the execution are written to a cache that can then be transparently used in the same way at runtime in the browser. This opens up new opportunities for performing operations that might be not possible or unperformant in a browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dojo Blocks is a new mechanism leveraging Build Time Rendering that allows executing code in Node.js as part of the build. The results from the execution are written to a cache that can then be transparently used in the same way at runtime in the browser. This opens up new opportunities for performing operations that might be not possible or unperformant in a browser.
```

Using the `text.block.ts` module in your application with the [`Block` meta](https://github.com/dojo/framework/blob/master/src/widget-core/meta/Block.ts):

```ts
// src/MyBlockWidget.ts
import Block from '@dojo/framework/widget-core/meta/Block';
import WidgetBase from '@dojo/framework/widget-core/WidgetBase';
import { v } from '@dojo/framework/widget-core/d';

import readFile from './read-file.block';

export default class MyBlockWidget extends WidgetBase {
	protected render() {
		const message = this.meta(Block).run(readFile)('../content/hello-dojo-blocks.txt');
		return v('div', [ message ]);
	}
}
```

This widget runs the `read-file.block.ts` module at build time, loading the file path passed which gets used as the children in the widget. The rendered application's HTML and CSS get written to the built `index.html`:

```html
<html>
<head>
	<title>Dojo Blocks</title>
	<meta name="theme-color" content="#222127">
	<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
</head>
<body>
	<div id="root"><div>Hello Dojo Block World!</div></div>
	<script type="text/javascript" src="bootstrap.js"></script></body>
</html>
```

### Simplifying Testing with Assertion Templates

> Assertion Templates make testing widgets with the testing harness even easier. Instead of having to manually curate each expectedRender result per test, you can now use the Assertion Template primitive to easily modify and layer outputs for the expected render.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assertion Templates make testing widgets with the testing harness even easier. Instead of needing to manually curate each `expectedRender` result per test, you can now use the Assertion Template primitive to easily modify and layer outputs for the expected render.
```

### Improved Stores Middleware

Middleware for Dojo stores has always gotten executed after a process has completed or throws an error, enabling users to make decisions based on the result and perform some additional actions. However, this was limiting middleware from running before or effectively wrapping a process. Version 5 of Dojo introduces `before` and `after` middleware to perform such actions around processes completely. [Read more on the `@dojo/framework/stores` readme][StoresReadme].

This addition of `before` and `after` middleware is a breaking change. However, if your application was already using `createCallbackDecorator` to create your middleware, then your application should continue to work with your application in version 5 of Dojo application as the `createCallbackDecorator` function has been adapted to transform existing middleware API to the new API.

### Improvements for `serve` and `watch` options in `@dojo/cli-build-app`

> The `@dojo/cli-build-app` command includes a number improvements to for running a development server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@dojo/cli-build-app` command includes a number improvements for running a development server:
```

* The previous `watch` modes, `memory` and `file` have been consolidated into a unified `watch` option
* Rebuilds your application when you make any changes within the project directory, not limited to `src` and `test` directories.

> * Live reload when when application is rebuilt during `watch` and running the development server using `serve`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Live reload when the application is rebuilt during `watch` and running the development server using `serve`
```

One of our primary goals for modern Dojo is to improve performance by serving minimal JavaScript bundles by default. For version 5, we're happy to announce an out of the box solution to optimize the user experience for dealing with bundling and loading polyfills in Dojo applications.

The Dojo build produces separate "platform" bundles that will be **only** be loaded based on two key conditions:

1) The shim module is imported somewhere in an application.
1) A users browser does not natively support the browser feature.

In short, if your application does not use the browser feature or you use a browser with native support, the polyfill will not be loaded! This change means serving less JavaScript and improving your application performance without compromising on features.

### New Polyfills Added to Shim

We've added additional third party polyfills to `@dojo/framework/shim`:

> * [`fetch`][FetchAPI] - The Fetch API provides an interface for fetching resources (including across the network).

Reviewer 2: nice! might be worth adding the import here instead of just `fetch` etc? ie `@dojo/framework/shim/fetch`?

Author: Nice idea

* [`WebAnimations`][WebAnimationsAPI] - The Web Animations API allows for synchronizing and timing changes to the presentation of a Web page, i.e. animation of DOM elements.
* [`ResizeObserver`][ResizeObserverAPI] - The ResizeObserver interface reports changes to the content rectangle of an Element or the bounding box of an SVGElement. The content rectangle is the box in which content can be placed, meaning the border box minus the padding.

To use these additional polyfills they should be imported like any other ponyfill provided by `@dojo/framework/shim` and they no longer need to be explicitly added/import to your Dojo application.

### Better Build Time Rendering (BTR)

Build time rendering provides the rendering of your application to HTML during the build and in-lines critical CSS. BTR allows an application to render static HTML pages and offer some advantages of server-side rendering (SSR) such as performance and search engine optimization without the complexities of running a server to support full SSR. Build time rendering has been available via the Dojo [cli-build-app][CliBuildAppReadme]  command since our initial 2.0.0 release.

> The 5.0.0 release brings a more robust, flexible and feature-rich build time rendering. This is made possible by running your application in a browser environment, ensuring maximum support for browser APIs and functionality.

Reviewer 2: This is still a cop out I think sorry 🙈. Lemme try:
We've made a number of stability and feature enhancements in 5.0.0 thanks to now running your application in a real browser environment. New features include:

* Support for StateHistory api (see below)
* Dojo Blocks (see below)
* Multiple page HTML generation
* Screenshots of pages visited during Build Time Rendering
* Better error messaging
